okay so this is an experiment this is
chapter three I'm outside because I'm
nowhere near home at the moment but I've
got a few minutes to go through at least
part of chapter 3 which is called the
spark I'm not going to get through the
whole lot because it's a much longer
chapter than what chapter 2 is so the
spark is the famous chapter with the two
stone tablets that we'll get to
eventually these are mentioned in one of
David's TED Talks
so the spark is about knowledge but
knowledge from the Enlightenment
essentially so the kind of culture of
criticism that we've spoken about
previously it is the thing that sets
fire to the rest of civilization is the
thing that allows us to create knowledge
that is without bound and that we can
have cosmic significance okay so the
spark begins by talking about how
ancient myths were largely
anthropocentric they were about us so
our first attempts to understand the
world were always centered on what human
beings were doing what human beings were
capable of doing and how the rest of
reality was here for us was here to try
and attack us or here to try and
preserve us in some way so this idea is
called anthropocentrism so let me begin
at the very beginning of chapter 3 and
we will read through at least a part of
it so it begins most ancient accounts of
the reality beyond our everyday
experience were not only false they had
a radically different character from
modern ones they were anthropocentric
that is to say they centered on human
beings and more broadly on people
entities with intentions and human-like
thoughts which included powerful
supernatural people such as spirits and
gods so winter might be attributed to
someone sadness harvests to someone's
generosity natural disasters to
someone's anger and so on such
explanations often involved cosmically
significant beings caring what humans
did or having interactions about them
this conferred cosmic significance on
humans too then the geocentric theory
placed humans at the physical hub of the
universes will those two kinds of
anthropocentrism explanatory and
geometrical made each other more
plausible and there as a result pre
enlightenment thinking was more
anthropocentric than we can readily
imagine nowadays so here's the idea that
the geocentric series has put humans at
the hub of existence okay or the
physical center of human existence but
the word hub there is important but as
David is about to explain what modern
science did was to undo that
misconception and it took human beings
the species away from being some kind of
special entity astronomically we aren't
at the center of the universe nor some
kind of special entity biologically we
evolved from lower forms of animals and
this has led to a whole bunch of
misconceptions about people and
knowledge and the significance of both
so although it was right literally that
we are not at the center of the universe
the removal of humans as being
significant to the universe is wrong and
so this new view that we're going to get
from David is that knowledge has cosmic
significance and one kind of entity
creates explanatory knowledge that's
people so he's about to explain that
people are special
so therefore the earth is a hub this is
the amazing contribution the amazing and
surprising thing that David said during
one of his TED talks David then begins
to speak about astrology and how
astrology makes the logical case that
because while I'm not sure that he says
this but this is the fact that it it
makes logical sense
that the stars control people's lives
because indeed things that happen in the
sky do have effects on the ground on
people's lives when the clouds open up
and it rains that has a very direct
effect on people growing crops and if
the sky doesn't rain that also has an
effect people may have seen all sorts of
things coming from the sky that affected
their lives not least of which the
change in seasons can be predicted by
looking at the constellations on the sky
so it makes perfect sense the sky
controls what goes on here on earth of
course it's false in many many ways the
particular pattern of stars happens to
correlate with certain events that
happen here on earth but the reason why
we get changes of weather over the
course of the year and why those changes
are periodic and they are in a sense
foretold in the Stars they correlate
with the Stars but are not caused by the
Stars is because of the axis tilt Siri
and the axis tilt theory is the thing
that explains why the Stars happened to
be in different places over the course
of the year and repeat their positions
over the course of the year but you can
draw a reasonably logical straight line
from common-sense to astrology
but david says of course now we know
that the pattern of stars and planets in
our night sky has no significance for
human affairs we know that we are not
the center of the universe it does not
even have a geometrical center at all
and we know that although some of the
Titanic Astrophysical phenomena that I
have described play a significant role
in our past we have never been
significant to them we call a phenomenon
significant or fundamental if parochial
theories are inadequate to explain it or
if it appears in the explanation of many
other phenomena so it may seem that
human beings and their wishes and
actions are extremely insignificant in
the universe at large anthropocentric
misconceptions have also been overturned
in every other fundamental area of
science and knowledge of physics now
expressed entirely in terms of entities
that are as impersonal as nuclear's
points and lines such as elementary
particles forces and space-time a
four-dimensional continuum with three
dimensions of space at one time now the
wind has picked up here so much I'm
going to have to move okay we're talking
about natural forces sorting human
affairs I've moved will continue for
another 10 to 15 minutes I think the
light will hold out and the wind it
shouldn't be too bad so I was up to the
part where David has just defined what
significant or fundamental happens to be
so let me continue and he is now going
to explain the issues with abandoning
anthropocentric ideas but also the
important move forward that abandoning
those answer eccentric ideas happens to
be so let me read he says so fruitful
has this abandonment of answer eccentric
theories being and so important in the
broader history of ideas that
Antti anthropocentrism has increasingly
been elevated to the status of a
universal principle sometimes called the
principle of mediocrity which says there
is nothing significant about humans in
the cosmic scheme of things as the
physicist Stephen Hawking put it humans
are just a chemical scum on the surface
of a typical planet that's in orbit
around a typical star on the outskirts
of a typical galaxy end quote
the proviso in the cosmic scheme of
things is necessary because the chemical
scum evidently does have a special
significance according to values that it
applies to itself such as moral values
but the principle says that all such
values are themselves anthropocentric
they explained earlier behavior of the
scum which is itself insignificant it is
easy to mistake quirks of one's own
familiar environment or perspective such
as the rotation of the night sky for
objective features of what one is
observing but for mistake rules of thumb
such as the prediction of daily sunrises
for universal laws I shall refer to that
sort of error as parochialism okay so
this idea of parochialism where we are
making the error of assuming that what's
going on in our local environment
happens to be of universal importance
and that's a mistake
he continues anthropocentric errors are
examples of parochialism but not all
parochialism is an sirup eccentric
for instance the prediction that the
seasons are in-phase all over the world
is a parochial error but not an
anthropocentric one it does not involve
explaining seasons in terms of people
now david goes on to explain a little
bit more about spaceship earth in this
idea that the planet Earth is an
exceedingly fragile biosphere that is
here to try and keep us and everything
else on board alive so it is a spaceship
that is taking us on a journey around
the Sun and in turn journey through
around the galaxy and in turn a journey
into the few
but the earth is here in an attempt to
sustain us and to sustain life this is
what this concept of spaceship earth is
and David undermined this and I think he
does one of the best jobs of this that
anyone has ever done in print anyone has
ever done in person and he's going to
explain something really profound which
is this idea that the earth is not here
to sustain us it's not trying to sustain
us if anything we're going to say that
it was either a force for good or a
force for evil towards human beings we
would have to argue it's pretty much a
force for evil we have to do what we can
to try and protect ourselves from the
environment from the planet Earth sure
it is the friendliest place for human
beings in all of existence that we know
of no one's thinking of going to Venus
to for a holiday there isn't much in
interstellar space that's going to
sustain us so the earth is more
sustaining than other places but it's
not a friendly spaceship it is a place
of hostile weather and hostile climate
of disease and pestilence of pollution
in the water that we have to try and
filter out it is forever trying to
starve us or to burn us to blow us away
to drown us to earthquake us to death it
is not a friendly place the other
organisms that are here are not
particularly friendly I'm here in
Australia there is a larger number of
species of spider and snake that can
kill you here I think than just about
anywhere so the earth is not our friend
it's also not our enemy ok but it's just
an inert Rock in space that happens to
be our home and we have to do our best
with what we can with the resources that
are here in our backyard to try and
protect ourselves from the planet it's
not that it's an enemy it's just
unfriendly ok so let me continue with
chapter 3 David writes the spaceship
earth metaphor
and the principle of mediocrity have
both gained wide acceptance among
scientifically minded people to the
extent of becoming truisms this is
despite the fact that on the face of it
they argue in somewhat opposite
directions the principle of mediocrity
stresses how typical the earth and its
chemical scum are in the sense of being
unremarkable while spaceship earth
stresses how untypical they are in the
sense of being uniquely suited to each
other skipping a little both oppose
arrogance the principle of mediocrity
opposes the pre enlightenment arrogance
as believing ourselves significant in
the world the spaceship earth metaphor
opposes the enlightenment arrogance of
aspiring to control the world we should
not consider ourselves significant they
assert we should not expect the world to
submit indefinitely to our depredations
skipping a little more if you were
seeking Maxim's worth being carved in
stone and recited each morning before
breakfast you could do a lot worse than
to use their negations that is to say
the truth is that people are significant
in the cosmic scheme of things and the
Earth's biosphere is incapable of
supporting human life so that's
remarkable in my own words the principle
of mediocrity is this idea that we are
in no sense and the cosmic scheme of
things in a particularly special place
that planet Earth is just a typical
planet orbiting a typical star and more
and more that we learn about science we
kind of understand that this is true in
a sense the Kepler data from the Space
Telescope has revealed that the
overwhelming majority of stars that are
out there have planets and they have
terrestrial planets kind of like the
earth possibly in what they call the
habitable zone or their habitable zones
a rather useless concept given that well
what is habitable depends entirely upon
the technology that you have or what
indeed if we're talking about lower
forms of biology exactly what their
temperature ranges happened to be
because we know that even certain kinds
of bacteria archaea can exist at
temperatures
well higher than the boiling point of
water and well below the freezing point
of water so this idea of the habitable
zone has has changed over time
nonetheless the point is the planet
Earth is possibly a well the solar
system is possibly going to turn out to
be a rather typical kind of structure in
the universe but there are planets like
Earth out there and not exactly like
Earth they might not have human beings
or animals or biology at all but in
terms of just the geology of the earth
it might be pretty unremarkable so this
is the principle of mediocrity that
we're not the center of the universe
that the earth is typical and yet on the
other hand the spaceship earth idea is
that the earth is not typical in any way
it's the only thing that can sustain us
we have to preserve it otherwise or in
all sorts of trouble because there's
nowhere else to go but David is saying
here that two things actually are true
it's not the case that the earth is the
only thing that can sustain us indeed it
doesn't sustain us the majority of the
species of animals that have ever
existed have gone extinct we know this
99.9 something-or-other percent of
animals that have ever existed on this
planet have been wiped out exterminated
by the very planet that are supposed to
be sustaining them if humans want to be
different the exception to that rule we
have to use the one feature that we have
that is superior to every other animal
on this planet and that is our special
relationship to the construction of
explanatory knowledge our minds so the
earth not going to sustain us it's not
going to support us only we can do that
and moreover this same thing that allows
us to support ourselves here on the
earth is the very thing that ultimately
make us what makes us significant in the
cosmic scheme of things because we can
create explanatory knowledge we create
that thing which allows us to
transform the environment around us and
we will start local we will spread
global and then we will move cosmic and
so there is absolutely no law of physics
preventing this the only thing that
prevents the growth of knowledge and
hence the spread of people throughout
the universe to make the universe are
more friendly bio-friendly place is our
desire to do so our wealth and capacity
to do so and our knowledge of how to do
so so let's continue david writes we are
an uncommon form of ordinary matter the
communist form is plasma atoms
dissociated into their electrically
charged components which typically emits
Bryant visible light because it is in
stars which are rather hot
we scums are made Lees infrared emitters
because we contain liquids and complex
chemicals which can only exist at a much
lower range of temperatures he then
explains that the majority of the
universe has a temperature of 2.7
degrees above absolute zero which is 270
degrees colder than the freezing point
of water only very unusual circumstances
he right can make anything colder than
those microwaves though the cosmic
microwave background radiation of 2.7
Kelvin nothing in the universe is known
to be cooler than about 1 Kelvin except
in certain physics laboratories on earth
there the record low temperature
achieved is below one billionth of a
Kelvin um any system this is quite
remarkable as well to think about that
if you had some technology which allowed
you to measure the temperature on some
other planet we kind of can do that but
with the with the level of fidelity
required that we could determine exactly
what the temperature was in in some
small region on that planet if we found
a place on that planet which had a
temperature below 1 Kelvin then we have
to presume that there are people there
because we know of no physical process
that
naturally could do that the only way
that it can be done the only way to
remove heat down to a million to the
Kelvin above absolute zero would be via
some technology and so if you discover
in the universe somewhere somewhere that
is very very very very close to absolute
zero and certainly some quite distance
from 2.7 Kelvin above absolute zero so
something really really cold you found
aliens quite remarkable David then goes
on to go through the story about what a
typical place in the universe is like
and this is that wonderful part of his
TED talk where he jokes that at great
expense the organisers of Ted have been
able to do an immersive rendering of the
of what it's like in intergalactic space
and everything goes dark impeccably dark
because that's what interstellar
intergalactic space is like there's not
much matter there and he says this is a
typical place in the universe he writes
cold dark and empty that unimaginable it
environment is typical of the universe
and there's another measure of how I'm
typical the earth in its chemical scum
are in a straightforward physical sense
the issue of the cosmic significance of
this type of scum will shortly take us
back a little intergalactic space but
let me first return to Earth and
consider the spaceship earth metaphor in
its straightforward physical version
this much is true
if tomorrow physical conditions on the
Earth's surface were to change even
slightly by Astrophysical standards then
no humans could live here unprotected
just as they could not survive in a
spaceship whose life support system had
broken down yet I am writing this an
Oxford in England where the winter
nights are likewise often cold enough to
kill any human unprotected by clothing
and other technologies
so while intergalactic space will kill
me in a matter of seconds Oxfordshire in
its primeval state might do the same in
a matter of hours which can be
considered life support only in the most
contrived sense there is a life support
system in Oxfordshire today Oxfordshire
Oxfordshire this is my Australian
difficulty with that word
life support system in Oxfordshire today
it was not provided by the biosphere it
has been built by humans it consists of
clothes houses farms hospitals and
electrical grid a sewage system and so
on nearly the whole of the Earth's
biosphere NAT the primeval state was
likewise incapable of keeping an
unprotected human alive for long it will
be much more accurate to call it a death
trap for humans rather than a
life-support system even the Great Rift
Valley in Eastern Africa where our
species evolved was barely more
hospitable than primeval Oxfordshire
unlike the life-support system in that
imagined spaceship the Great Rift Valley
lacked a safe water supply and medical
equipment and comfortable living
quarters and was infested with predators
parasites and disease organisms it
frequently injured poisoned wrenched
starved and sickened its passengers and
most of them died as a result it was
similarly harsh to all the other
organisms that lived there few
individuals lived comfortably or died of
old age and the supposedly beneficent
biases that is no accident most
populations of most species are living
close to the edge of disaster and death
here has to be that way because as soon
as some small group somewhere begins to
have a slightly easier life Australia
that is no accident most populations of
most species are living close to the
edge of disaster and death it has to be
that way because as soon as some small
group somewhere begins to have a
slightly easier life then that for any
reason for instance an increased food
supply or the extinction of a competitor
or predator than its numbers increased
as a result other resources are depleted
and then David speaks about just how
terrible nature happens to be so there's
he writes there's rampant disabling and
killing of individuals by starvation
exhaustion predation overcrowding and
all those other natural processes that
is the situation to which evolution
adapts organisms and that therefore is
the lifestyle in which the Earth's
biosphere seems adapted to sustaining
them so the only way in which we could
make the argument that the earth seems
to sustain us is because
organisms have adapted to the earth to
whatever the the whimsical nature of the
environment happens to be any particular
time based upon climate and so when the
climate has altered over geological
timescales
then or or some other environmental
factor simply causes the balance of
species to change predators increase or
decrease competitors increase or
decrease food supply goes up goes down
then so do the fortunes of the animals
that happen to live in that area all the
organisms generally they live in that
area so it's not like the earth
sustaining us the animals that are here
now the plants that are here now the
organisms broadly that are here on the
earth now are well-suited to the
environment as it happens to be but we
know the environment cannot possibly
remain the same
this is the lesson from geology and
biology together the only reason that we
have evolution by natural selection is
because of changes in the environment if
there were no changes in the environment
there would be no selection pressure and
there would be no change
you would have random mutations but
there'll be nothing to select those
random mutations david writes the
biosphere is not a great preserver of
species in addition to being notoriously
cruel to individuals evolution involves
continual extinctions of entire species
the average rate of extinction since the
beginning of life on earth has been
about 10 species per year the numbers
own a very approximately becoming much
higher during the relatively brief
periods that paleontologists call mass
extinction events the rate at which
species have come into existence has
unbalanced only slightly exceeded the
extinction rate and the net effect is
that the overwhelming majority of
species that have ever existed on earth
perhaps 99.9% of them are now extinct
okay so David speaks about how it just
emphasizes how hostile the environment
the biosphere the planet is two
organisms generally and two human beings
in particular
he writes today almost the entire
capacity of the Earth's life support
system for humans has been provided not
for us but by us using our ability to
create new knowledge there are people in
the great Strait Rift Valley today who
live far more comfortably than early
humans did and far greater numbers
through knowledge of things like tools
farming and hygiene the earth did
provide the raw materials through our
survival just as the Sun has provided
the energy and supernovae provided the
elements and so on but a heap of raw
materials is not the same thing as a
life support system the life support
system requires knowledge he goes on to
explain